On the Personality Traits of StackOverflow Users
Blerina Bazelli, Abram Hindle, Eleni Stroulia
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Email: {bazelli,hindle1,stroulia}@ualberta.ca
Abstract—In the last decade, developers have been increasingly sharing their questions with each other through Question
and Answer (Q&A) websites. As a result, these websites have
become valuable knowledge repositories, covering a wealth of
topics related to particular programming languages. This knowledge is even more useful as the developer community evaluates
both questions and answers through a voting mechanism. As
votes accumulate, the developer community recognizes reputed
members and further trusts their answers. In this paper, we
analyze the community’s questions and answers to determine
the developers’ personality traits, using the Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC). We explore the personality traits
of StackOverflow authors by categorizing them into different
categories based on their reputation. Through textual analysis of
StackOverflow posts, we found that the top reputed authors are
more extroverted compared to medium and low reputed users.
Moreover, authors of up voted posts express significantly less
negative emotions than authors of down voted posts.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Question and Answer (Q&A) websites have gained significant ground as the preferred forums for developer interactions,
in part due to support they offer for users to up-vote/down-vote
questions and answers, accept answers as correct and edit the
posts of others [1], [2]. StackOverflow.com (StackOverflow)
is one of the most popular Q&A websites focused mainly on
questions related to programming languages.
Since StackOverflow posts are written in natural language,
comprehensibility metrics and textual context analysis tools
can potentially provide us with valuable information on what
makes a posting perceived as trustworthy by the community.
Thus to take into account the semantics of the text, we have
also applied a text analysis tool, the Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (LIWC), which uses an embedded contextual
dictionary [3], [4]. The LIWC tool has been used to identify
the personality traits of Facebook users [5] as well as the antisocial personality types [6].
This study is a partial replication of Rigby and Hassan’s
work [7] (Questions 1 and 2). They analyzed the Apache
web-server developers’ personalities using their development
mailing list. They compared the personalities of the top 4
developers with two categories of developers having sent more
than 30 messages and less than 30 messages respectively.
The extra features of Q&A websites (compared to mailinglists) allow us to also examine the personality types of
the authors from different perspectives (Questions 3 and 4).
The main goal of our study is to analyze and compare the
authors’ personality types, based on the five most common
personality traits [3]. Furthermore, we compare our results
with Rigby and Hassan’s work to determine differences
and commonalities of personality traits among mailing list
developers and StackOverflow authors.
Our research questions are:
1) Do the top reputed authors’ personality types differ?
2) Do author personalities vary by reputation?

3)
4)

Do authors of posts belonging to the same topics
share similar personality types?
Do personality traits have an impact on the process
of up-voting/down-voting questions and answers?

II. R ELATED W ORK
There is much research based on StackOverflow’s open
data-set [8]. Mamykina et al. [1] analyzed StackOverflow data
in order to find the reason why this website has been grown
rapidly since it started. They found that most of the questions
asked were quickly answered. Via interviews they found
that factors such as reputation scores and badges motivated
participation. Treude et al. [2] categorized the questions being
asked on StackOverflow. They found that questions belonging
into the categories of “review”, “conceptual” and “how-to”
are most likely to be answered. Barua et al. [9] analyzed the
LDA topics of StackOverflow users’ posts. They discovered
topic trends of increasing popularity (e.g., Android, iPhone
development) and decreasing popularity (e.g., Perl, Blackberry
development).
Pennebaker et al. [3], [4] tried to associate words with
one’s personality traits based on a study performed on
1203 introductory psychology students. They developed the
LIWC tool, which includes a dictionary and 72 language
dimensions. Each dimension has a value which is calculated
based on the frequency of words related to this particular
dimension. However, only some of these are related to the “Big
Five Personality Traits” (Neuroticism, Extroversion, Openness,
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness). LIWC was used in
a study by Summer et al. [6] to analyze and predict antisocial traits (“Dark Triad Personality Traits”) of Twitter users.
Kramer et al. [5] used LIWC to study emotional expressions
on Facebook and found evidence of emotional contagion
(spreading of similar sentiment) between users.
This study aims to replicate the work done by Rigby and
Hassan [7] on the Open Source Software (OSS) developers, by
applying it to StackOverflow developers. Rigby and Hassan
gathered data from the Apache server mailing list and used
LIWC to determine the personality traits of OSS developers
and whether their personality changes as they become more
active. Moreover, they aimed to discover what personality traits
are associated with the developers’ emotional state before and
after an Apache version is being released. According to their
results, 2 out of the top 4 developers had similar personality
traits and differ from the general population. Moreover, a
decrease in the developers’ positive emotions correlated with
their imminent departure from the project. Finally, the textual
analysis of the developers’ e-mails revealed that before an
Apache version was released, their e-mails were composed of
words that expressed mostly optimistic feelings.
III. DATA C OLLECTION AND T EXT A NALYSIS
We have analyzed the data of the six XML files provided
by the 2013 MSR challenge [10], [8]. They include all the

questions and answers posted on StackOverflow from August
2008 to August 2012, along with their authors’ details.
The way a person writes and the different kind of words
they select can reveal, to some extent, their personality types.
For instance, a teacher is often able to uniquely recognize
the identity of their student based upon their writing style
[3]. We use a text-analysis tool, LIWC [3], to analyze the
posts and consequently to define the personality traits of the
authors. LIWC includes a dictionary of 2.700 words and word
stems. The dictionary is divided into several categories (such
as social processes, affective processes, cognitive mechanisms,
etc.) and sub-categories such as insight, causation, discrepancy
and tentativeness. At this point, it should be noted that when
we refer to an author as neurotic, extroverted, open, agreeable
or conscientious, we refer to their LIWC scores corresponding
to their text corporae and not the authors themselves.
According to Pennebaker et al. [3], [4], some of the LIWC
measures are correlated with the “Big Five Personality Traits”:
a) “Neuroticism”: is associated with negative emotions such
as anxiety, anger or envy and therefore is correlated to the
presence of negative emotional words.
b) “Extroversion”: expresses an emotional state where the
person feels the need to be more sociable and interactive with
others. Therefore, “Extroversion” depends on the presence of
social and positive LIWC measures as well as the absence of
tentative and negative emotional measures.
c) “Openness”: characterizes people who are open to new
ideas and is positively correlated with tentativeness and
negatively with the causation LIWC measure.
d) “Agreeableness”: describes people who tend to agree with
others and it was found that the dimension of articles is the
most significant factor that determines this personality trait.
e) “Conscientiousness”: is negatively correlated with
negations and negative emotional LIWC measures.
Pennebaker et al. [4] found that some LIWC factors
are correlated with each one of the personality traits. The
correlation between a language dimension and a personality
trait may be positive or negative. For example, the personality
trait of extroversion is linearly modeled as: Extroversion =
−T entativity − N egations + Social + P ositiveEmotion.
The full models can be found in Pennebaker’s et al. work [4].
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In order to answer our research questions, we have divided
the authors into several groups according to their reputation
(top 10, high, medium and low). We also have categorized the
authors based on their posts’ content (defined by the keywords
with wich they have been tagged) and also by the posts’ votes.
The default reputation when a user registers on
StackOverflow is 1. The data revealed that nearly 35%
(457,627) of the users have neither asked any question nor
written any response to existing questions. Since we lack
information about these users, we do not include them in
our analysis. For each StackOverflow question we applied the
LIWC on each post separately.
Our analysis method involves three steps:
First, as the posts within the XML file are in HTML format,
we discard the HTML tags from the posts before applying
LIWC. We also discard code snippets (text between <code>
and </code>).
Second, we apply the LIWC tool on the text from the previous
step. Based on the LIWC language dimensions, we compute
the values of the “Big Five Personality Traits”.
Third, we compare the distributions of the personality traits’
values by using the ANOVA and Tukey’s HSD test.

V. R ESULTS
A. Do the top reputed authors’ personality types differ?
We selected the top 10 reputed users in order to see if
they share similar personality traits. The reputation of the top
reputed users ranges from 214.774 to 465.166. Next, we select
all the posts belonging to these users (both questions and
answers). By applying the LIWC tool to each post separately,
we are able to calculate the values of the “Big Five Personality
Traits”. In order to compare the means of the distributions, we
apply a one-way ANOVA test. The two hypotheses are:
• H0 : The means among top authors are equal.
• H1 : The means among top authors are not equal.
According to the ANOVA test, we reject the Null
Hypothesis (P r(> F ) < 2e−16 ) for all the personality traits
tested. To further analyze these results we use the Tukey’s test
(a post-hoc test that compares all the possible combinations of
the means). See Figure 1a.
Based on the TukeyHSD test with respect to neuroticism,
the range of the 95% confidence intervals of neuroticism
for all authors was from -0.67 to 1.02 (0 being none). This
indicates there is a mild difference among authors in terms
of neuroticism. The results of Tukey’s test for the rest of the
personality traits reveal that there are several combinations of
authors who indeed share similar personality traits in terms of
extroversion, openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness.
B. How do the personalities vary by reputation?
Are there differences in the personality traits of top,
medium and low reputed users? We decided to investigate
the relationship between personalities and reputation. We
found out that the distribution of the authors’ reputation was
following a skewed distribution, similar to many countries
distribution of wealth. There are few authors (the top reputed
authors) who have very high reputation. On the other hand, the
vast majority of StackOverflow users have a low reputation
score. Therefore, we distinguish the authors into three main
categories as follows: 1% top reputed authors, 10% medium
reputed authors and the remaining 89% low reputed authors.
Our hypotheses for the ANOVA test are:
• H0 : The means of top-medium-low reputed authors are equal.
• H1 : The means are not equal.
The ANOVA test exposed that there are statistically
significant differences among top, medium and low reputed
users ( P r(> F ) < 2e−16 ). See Figure 1b. A further analysis
with Tukey’s HSD test exposed that there are differences
among all groups as we expected. More specifically, the
highest difference occurs among low and top reputed users.
The score of neuroticism of low reputed users is much higher
than top reputed users. This may suggest that authors who
express more neuroticism through their text corpus are not
being “awarded” by other users in terms of reputation points.
Furthermore, we observe that there is a difference between
medium and low reputed users. Again, the more reputed an
author, the lower neuroticism is measured. Finally, despite the
fact that there is a statistically significant difference between
top and medium reputed users (top users less neurotic than
medium reputed users), the mean is not much higher.
In terms of extroversion the highest discrepancy occurs
between top and low reputed users. Furthermore, top reputed
users exhibit more extroversion compared to medium reputed
users who exhibit more extroversion compared to the less
reputed ones. These results and the neuroticism results, hint
that highly reputed authors exhibit more extroversion and
lower neuroticism.
As mentioned above the personality trait of openness

characterizes one who is open to new ideas and/or shares their
ideas with others. Prior to this study we theorized that top
reputed authors could exhibit more openness as they were the
most experienced users on StackOverflow. Our results show
that top reputed authors are more open compared to both,
medium and low reputed users with the highest difference
among top and low reputed authors.
All the three categories also differ significantly in terms
of agreeableness. Top reputed authors are more agreeable
compared to the other two categories with the less agreeable
authors to be the low reputed ones.
Finally, medium and low reputed users tend to have similar
degree of conscientiousness according to Tukey’s HSD test.
Nonetheless, there is a difference among top and medium
reputed authors with the top reputed authors appearing more
conscientious whereas medium reputed authors appeared more
conscientious than low reputed users.

10−9 10−6

8−5 8−4 9−3 4−3 6−2 9−1 4−1

Neuro
Extro
Open
Agree
Conc

−4

−2

0

2

4

2−1

(a) Top 10 Authors

3−2

3−1

Neuro
Extro
Open
Agree
Conc
−4

−2

0

2

(b) 1) Top, 2) Medium and 3) Low reputed Authors

5−4

4−3

4−2

5−1

3−1

Neuro
Extro
Open
Agree
Conc

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

3−1

(c) 1) C#, 2) Android, 3) Java, 4) Javascript, 5) PHP

4−3

3−2

Neuro
Extro
Open
Agree
Conc
−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

(d) 1) Down-voted questions, 2) Up-voted questions, 3) Downvoted answers and 4) Up-voted answers

Fig. 1: 95% Confidence Intervals of difference of means
between Top 10 Authors, Reputed Authors, Tags, Down/Up
Questions/Answers. 2-1 means the difference of means
between 2) and 1) (e.g. C# and Java or Author 1 and 2).

C. Do authors of posts belonging to similar topics share
similar personality types?
A tag is a label that describes the content of the question
being asked and thus, helps categorize questions by topics such
as “Web Development”, “JavaScript”, “Authentication”, etc.
When a user asks a question, StackOverflow forces users to add
at least 1 tag. We examined the case of tags to be misleading;
as StackOverflow allows most of the users to edit others’ posts,
in such cases “moderators” edit the vast majority of posts by
replacing misleading tags with appropriate tags. Moreover, new
tags are automatically removed if they are not used by at least
one other question in a 6-month period. We found that the first
5 most common tags in descending order are: C#, Java, PHP,
JavaScript and Android.
We found all the posts tagged as each one of the above
tags for each author. Then, we computed the values of the
“Big Five Personality Traits” for each post. As long as an
author has multiple posts that correspond to one of the five
most popular tags, we compute the mean of these values per
author; therefore, we end up with a distribution composed of
the mean values for the personality traits for each user. For
instance, for an author who has written 5 posts tagged as
“Java”, we compute the mean of the personality traits’ values
and associate the author with the “Java” category.
Before applying the ANOVA test, we define the following
hypotheses:
• H0 : The means of the authors’ personality traits tagged for
each of the most popular 5 tags are equal.
• H1 : The means of the authors’ personality traits tagged for
each of the most popular 5 tags are not equal.
The ANOVA test applied on these distributions showed
(P r(> F ) < 2e−16 ) that we should reject the null hypothesis.
See Figure 1c. With that being said, there are statistically
significant differences among the authors belonging in different
tag categories. The Tukey’s HSD test exposed that authors with
posts tagged as “Android” tend to be slightly more neurotic
compared to authors who had posted posts related to “Java”,
“JavaScript” and “PHP”. Also, according to Tukey’s HSD test,
authors with posts tagged as “C#” are less neurotic than authors
having posted posts related to “Android” and “PHP”. Finally,
there is no statistically significant difference among owners of
posts associated with “C#” and “JavaScript”.
Furthermore, we explore the rest of the personality traits
in order to see if the tags follow a pattern similar to
the authors belonging into the three categories according to
their reputation (top, medium and low). As we can see in
Figure 3b, the personality traits of extroversion varies among

different tags. More specifically, authors of posts tagged as
“C#” exhibit more extroversion than those with posts related
to “Android”, “Java”, and “JavaScript”. Authors related to
“C#” programming language, follow the same pattern with
authors belonging to the top reputed users (Less Neurotic-More
extroverted). On the other hand, authors of “PHP” related posts
are more extroverted when compared with “Java”, “JavaScript”
and “Android” related posts.
Although there is no statistically significant difference
among authors who have been written posts related to “C#”
and “Android”, the former are more open to new ideas than
authors of posts related to “Java”, “JavaScript” and “PHP”
while “PHP” related authors are less open compared to
“JavaScript”, “Java” and “Android” related ones.
As for the personality trait of Agreeableness, the less
agreeable authors are those related to “C#” and “Java” posts.
The most interesting personality trait is “Conscientiousness”,
as authors belonging in several tag categories appear
to be equally conscientious (“C#”-“Android” and “Java”“JavaScript”-“PHP”). Although, Tukey’s test showed that
there is statistically significant difference among the other
combinations, the difference between the means is very small.
D. How much do personality traits differ between up-voted
and down-voted authors?
Since the personality types among authors of questions and
answers may not be similar, we divided the posts into questions
and answers based on their votes. We came up with 4 distinct
categories: Down-voted questions, Up-voted questions, Downvoted answers and Up-voted answers.
We noticed that 46% and 37% of all answers and questions
respectively did not have any votes. After excluding the “votefree” posts, questions and answers with at least 1 positive vote
are called Up-voted, while posts with less than 0 votes are
called Down-voted. We compare the authors belonging in these
categories as follows: Down-voted questions vs. Up-voted
questions and Down-voted answers vs. Up-voted answers as
the nature of a question being asked is different from an
answer. It should be noted that some authors may be double
counted as they may have both Up-voted posts and Downvoted posts.
• H0 : The means of the authors’ personality traits for each
category to be compared are equal
• H1 : The means of the authors’ personality traits for each
category to be compared are not equal
The ANOVA test results in P r(> F ) < 5.3e−6 for all the
personality traits; therefore we reject the Null Hypothesis.
As mentioned above we focus on comparing authors of
questions and answers separately. Based on Figure 1d, authors
belonging to the category of down-voted questions expressed
more neuroticism compared to the up-voted ones. We cannot
assume the same result for the answers, as according to
Tukey’s HSD test there is no significant difference among upvoted and down-voted answers.
Despite the fact that we expected authors of down-voted
questions to be less extroverted, these questions exhibit more
extroversion than up-voted ones. Authors of up-voted answers
exhibited more extroversion than the down-voted answers.
We theorized that authors of up-voted posts might be
more open than authors of down-voted posts. Authors of
up-voted questions and answers had higher openness means,
compared to authors of down-voted questions and answers
respectively. However, they exhibit less agreeableness and
conscientiousness.

VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper we analyzed the personality properties of
top, medium and low reputed authors, authors of most
popular tags and most Up-voted and Down-voted posts on
StackOverflow by replicating Rigby and Hassan’s work [7],
who analyzed the personality traits of the top contributors
of the Apache web-server project using the development
mailing list. According to our results, some of the top
reputed authors share similar personality traits which matches
Rigby and Hassan’s pattern (2 out of 4 top developers
within Apache shared similar personality traits). We also
found out that the top, medium and low reputed authors
differ in Neuroticism, Extroversion, Openness, Agreeableness
and Conscientiousness. As we expected, top reputed authors
are less neurotic, more extroverted and open compared
to medium and low reputed users who may just have
entered the StackOverflow community. This difference may
imply that posters who exhibit less neuroticism and more
extroversion gain more popularity and reputation. Rigby and
Hassan’s [7] conclusion differ; they report similar Extroversion
and Openness measures between top authors and the general.
Furthermore, Tukey’s HSD test shows that authors related
to posts tagged as “Android” exhibit more neuroticism than
authors with posts tagged as “Java”, “JavaScript” and “PHP”.
Authors related to “C#” follow the same pattern as the top
reputed users: less neuroticism and more extroversion. Yet
authors of “PHP” related posts exhibited more extroversion
than authors of “Java”, “JavaScript” and “Android” posts.
These results could serve as a measure that managers can
use to hire programmers who can ask and answer questions
effectively. In the future, we will focus on analyzing the
variation of StackOverflow authors’ personalities over time.
Furthermore, we would like to investigate the different kind of
the personalities of question askers and question respondents
and if they relate to teamwork abilities.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

L. Mamykina, B. Manoim, M. Mittal, G. Hripcsak, and B. Hartmann,
“Design lessons from the fastest q&a site in the west,” in Proceedings
of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2011, pp. 2857–2866.
C. Treude, O. Barzilay, and M.-A. Storey, “How do programmers ask
and answer questions on the web?: Nier track,” in Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2011 33rd International Conference on. IEEE, 2011.
J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth, “Linguistic inquiry
and word count: Liwc 2001,” Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
2001.
J. W. Pennebaker, L. A. King et al., “Linguistic styles: Language use as
an individual difference,” Journal of personality and social psychology,
vol. 77, no. 6, pp. 1296–1312, 1999.
A. D. Kramer, “The spread of emotion via facebook,” in Proceedings
of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 2012, pp. 767–770.
C. Sumner, A. Byers, R. Boochever, and G. J. Park, “Predicting dark
triad personality traits from twitter usage and a linguistic analysis of
tweets,” in Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), 2012 11th
International Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2012, pp. 386–393.
P. C. Rigby and A. E. Hassan, “What can oss mailing lists tell us? a
preliminary psychometric text analysis of the apache developer mailing
list,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Mining
Software Repositories. IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 23.
J. Atwood, “Stack overflow creative commons data dump,” June
2009, http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2009/06/stack-overflow-creativecommons-data-dump/.
A. Barua, S. W. Thomas, and A. E. Hassan, “What are developers
talking about? an analysis of topics and trends in stack overflow,”
Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 1–36, 2012.
A. Bacchelli, “Mining challenge 2013: Stack overflow,” in The 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, 2013.

